---
title: '黎曼几何：流形和流形上的故事'
date: 2199-01-01
tags:
  - notes
  - riemann geometry
---

补充一些基础的微分流形知识
## Regular surface
### regular surface on $\mathbb R^n$
在 $\mathbb R^n$ 有一些最直接的曲面，
>**Def.** regular surface
>	A subset $M \subset \mathbb R ^n$ is called a **regular surface** if for each point $p \in M$, there exists a neighborhood $V$ of $p$ in $\mathbb R^n$ and a map $x:U\to R^n$ of an open set $U subset R^2$ onto $V \cap U$ such that
>	1. $\mathbf x$ is differentiable,
>	2. $\mathbf x:U \to V \cap M$ is a [homeomorphism](https://mathworld.wolfram.com/Homeomorphism.html), and
>	3. $(d \mathbf x)_q : \mathbb R^k \to \mathbb R^n$ is injective for all $q \in U$.

Any open subset of a regular surface is also a regular surface.

>**Thm.**
>	for any two parametrizations $\mathbf x: U \subset \mathbb R^k \to M^k$, $\mathbf y: V \subset \mathbb R^k \to M^k$, with $\mathbf x (U) \cap \mathbf y(V) = W \not = \emptyset$.
>	Then, $h =\mathbf x ^{-1} \circ \mathbf y: \mathbf y ^{-1}(W) \to \mathbf x ^{-1}(W)$ is a diffeomorphism.

**proof.**
	Firstly, we observe that $h$ is a homeomophism, since $h$ is the composition of two homeomorphism.
	Let $r \in \mathbf y^{-1}(W)$ and $q = h(r)$. 
	Denote $(u_1, \dots u_k) \in U$ and $(v_1, \dots, v_n) \in V$, then we can write $\mathbf x(u_1,\dots,u_k) = (v_1(u1,\dots,u_k), \dots, v_n(u1,\dots,u_k))$.
	By condition (3), we can suppose that
	$$
	\frac{\partial(v_1,\dots,v_k)}{\partial (u_1,\dots, u_k)}(q) \not = 0
	$$
	(大不了换一下$U$各个维度的次序)
	Extend $\mathbf x$ to a mapping $F: U\times \mathbb R^{n-k} \to \mathbb R^n$ given by
	$$
	\begin{eqnarray}
&&F(u_1,\dots,u_k,t_{k+1},\dots,t_n)\\ 
& = & (v_1(u_1,\dots,u_k),\dots,v_k(u_1,\dots,u_k),\\
&&v_{k+1}(u_1,\dots,u_k)+t_{k+1},\dots,v_{n}(u_1,\dots,u_k)+t_{n})
\end{eqnarray}
	$$
	Then, $F$ is differentiable and $F|_{U\times(0,\dots,0)} = \mathbf x$. 
	$$
	\det (dF_q) = \det\begin{pmatrix}
 \frac{\partial v_1}{\partial u_1}  & \cdots & \frac{\partial v_1}{\partial u_k} &  & &\\
 \vdots  & \ddots  &  &  && \\
 \frac{\partial v_k}{\partial u_1} &  & \frac{\partial v_k}{\partial u_k} &  & &\\
 * & * & * & 1 & &\\
 * & * & * & & \ddots &\\
 * & * & * &  & &1
\end{pmatrix} = \frac{\partial(v_1,\dots,v_k)}{\partial (u_1,\dots, u_k)}(q) \not = 0
	$$
	We are then able to apply the inverse function theorem, which guarantees the existence of a neighborhood $Q$ of $\mathbf x(q)$ where $F^{-1}$ exist and differentiable. 
	Since $\mathbf y$ is continuous, then exist $R$ s.t. $\mathbf y(R) \subset Q$. Then $h|_R = F^{-1} \circ \mathbf y|_R$ is differentiable at $r$. Hence, $h$ is differentiable in $\mathbf y ^{-1} (W)$.
	A similar arguement would show that $h^{-1}$ is differentiable as well, which finish the prove.


Now, we will show another way to construct a regular surface.
### Inverse image of regular value
In this section, we let $F:U \subset \mathbb R^n \to \mathbb R^m$ be a differentiable mapping of an open set $U$ of $\mathbb R^n$.

>**Def.** critical point and critical value
>	a point $p \in U$ and $dF_p:\mathbb R^n \to \mathbb R^m$ is not surjective, $p$ called _critical point_.
>	the image $F(p)$ callled _critical value_.

>**Def.** regular value
>	a point $a \in \mathbb R^m that is not a critical value.

Any $a \not \in F(U)$ is a regular value.
If there exist a regular value of $F$ in $\mathbb R^m$, then $n \ge m$.

>**Thm.**
>	Let $a \in F(U)$ be a regular value of $F$, then $F^{-1}(a) \subset \mathbb R^n$ is a regular suface of dimension $k = n-m$.

**proof.**
	Let $p \in F^{-1}(a)$. Denote $q = (y_1,\dots,y_m,x_1,\dots,x_k)$ is a arbitary point in $\mathbb R^{n = m+k}$, and $F(q) = (f_1(q),\dots,f_m(q))$ its image by mapping $F$.
	We want to build up a parametrization from the mapping $F$, because $F$ produce all the imformation of the inverse image $F^{-1}(a)$.
	Since $a$ is a regular value, $dF_p$ is surjective. Therefore, we can suppose
	$$
	\frac{\partial(f_1,\dots,f_m)}{\partial(y_1, \dots,y_m)} (q)\not =0
	$$
	To use the inverse function theorem, we extend $F$ to a mapping $\varphi: U \subset \mathbb R^n \to \mathbb R^{n = m+k}$ by
	$$
	\varphi(y_1,\dots,y_m,x_1,\dots,x_k) = (f_1(q), \dots,f_m(q),x_1,\dots,x_k)
	$$
	Then$$
	\det(d\varphi)_p = \frac{\partial(f_1,\dots,f_m)}{\partial(y_1, \dots,y_m)} (q)\not =0
	$$
	By the inverse function theorem, $\varphi$ is a diffeomorphism of a neighborhood $Q$ of $p$ onto a neightborhood $W$ of $\varphi(p)$. Choose a compact cube $K^{m+k} \subset W \subset \mathbb R^{n=m+k}$ which have the center $\varphi(p)$.
	Define $\mathbf x = \varphi^{-1}|_{\{a\} \times K^{k} }$ on $K^{k}$.(这里记号有点混乱，可能需要一张图)
	Then, $\mathbf x$ is a mapping satisfied the conditions of regular suface.
	Since $p$ is arbitrary, then $F^{-1}(a)$ is a regular surface in $\mathbb R^n$.


---
## Orientable manifold
### orientable
>Def. Let $M$ be a differentiable manifold. We say that $M$ is *orientable* if $M$ adimits a differentiable structure $\{(U_\alpha , \mathbf{x}_\alpha)\}$ such that:
>	(i) for every pair $\alpha,\beta$, with $\mathbf x_\alpha(U_\alpha) \cap \mathbf x_\beta(U_\beta) = W \not = \emptyset$, $\det (\mathbf x_\alpha^{-1}\circ \mathbf x _\beta)$ is positive.


>Thm. If $M$ can be covered by two coordinate neighborhoods $V_1$ and $V_2$ in such a way that the intersection $V_1\cap V_2$ is connected, then $M$ is orientable.

Proof. 
	Since $\det (\mathbf x_1 ^{-1} \circ \mathbf x_2)$ is continuous, then it will not change the sign on $V_1 \cap V_2$. 
	We can change the sign of $\mathbf x_1$ if necessary, then  $\det (\mathbf x_1 ^{-1} \circ \mathbf x_2)$ will always positive.


### Discontinuous action of a group
#### projective space
#### Discontinuous action of a group
---
## Tangent field
### The tangent bundles
### Tengent field
### bracket
### Two way to consider bracket
---
### Others
#### Topology of manifold
#### differentiable partition of unity
